Hi and welcome to this lesson an object mutability and immutability.
So let's consider again an object in memory.
So remember an object is basically something that has a type.
And it also has some internal data it has state and it's located at some memory address so changing
the data inside the object is called modifying the internal state of the object.
So it's like looking at example of that.
Let's say we have this variable.
My account and my account references some object in memory at some memory address let's say memory address
1000 and let's say that the data type of this object is bank account and bank account has two instance
properties has an account number and a balance.
So right now the account number is 1 2 3 4 5.
The balance is 150.
Now suppose that we modify the balance so we've changed the balance we have deposited some money and
now the balance is 500.
So you'll notice that the internal state the data has changed but the memory address has not changed.
Right.
So unlike when we were dealing with integers where we had you know my VAR was pointing to 10.
And then when we said my articles 15 it changed the reference to a new integer object containing 15.
Here we're actually modifying the internal state of the same object.
Right so the data is changed but the memory address has not changed.
And we say that the object was mutated which is really just a fancy way of saying that the internal
state of the object changed.
So there's a little bit of a difference.
So now we can get to a definition an object whose internal state can be changed is called mutable but
an object has internal state cannot be changed.
It's called immutable right.
So these are just two definitions that you should remember and keep in mind because that is important
as we create objects throughout the lifetime of our programs.
We kind of need to know all those mutable objects all of those immutable objects that can make a difference.
So let's look at some examples in Python.
And let's start with immutable objects while all numbers in Python are immutable.
So ints floats booleans.
Complex numbers these are all immutable objects.
In other words they get created in memory at some memory address.
But we can never change the internal data the internal value of that number.
And we saw that in the last lesson when we were creating my VAR equals 10.
And then we said my VAR equals 15 we saw that we were actually changing the reference from one integer
10 to another integer with the value of 15.
We never modified the internal state that was contained inside that integer.
And that's in part because integers are immutable strings are also immutable.
Once you create a string you can never modify that string.
You can assign a string to your variable but you cannot change the internal state of that string.
Temples are also immutable.
And we'll look at that in a few seconds.
But tuples if you remember are created with round brackets they're essentially a container type of object
that contains elements.
Now the table is immutable in the sense that you cannot add or remove or replace elements in that list
or in that container.
Frozen Assets which we'll look at in lot more detail in this cause are also immutable type of objects
and of course user defined classes can also be immutable.
If you define your own class and you don't allow for any way of modifying the internal state of that
object you've created an immutable object.
Now what about mutable types while lists in Python are mutable lists.
If you remember are created with square brackets and they're also a container type.
Just like a tuple is a container type.
The difference between the list and the top or is that in lists you can add remove or replace elements
in that list so the list is a mutable object sets are all so mutable and will again look in two sets
and are a lot of detail in the schools but sets are mutable as are dictionaries and sets and dictionaries
are actually very related.
But dictionaries are also mutable.
You can add keys you can remove keys you can modify the value assigned to a key inside a dictionary
and so on.
And again we'll look into dictionaries and a lot of detail in the schools.
And of course your own user defined classes can be immutable.
You can write a class and you can allow people to change the value of you know variables inside your
class.
You can allow state changes to happen in which case you have a mutable object all right but a word of
warning about mutability and immutability.
And it's a fine point but let's take a look at a couple.
So let's say T equals 1 to 3.
So this is a topical.
Now remember the table is immutable.
Right.
So you cannot add or remove or replace elements in that list.
Now furthermore in this case the topple itself is immutable but all the elements inside the table are
integers and so they are also immutable.
But now consider this.
Let's say that we create two variables A and B both lists now lists we know are mutable we can add elements
remove elements replace elements in lists.
So those are mutable type of objects now let's create a temple that consists of two elements A and B.
In other words T is a top or where the first element is a list containing one and two.
And the second element is also a list containing 3 and 4.
Now you have got to be a little careful here because we can now add elements to A and B because A and
B are lists and are mutable.
So now once we've executed those two lines of code our top will looks like this.
Right.
The first element change from 1 to 2 1 2 3 and the second element change from 3 4 2 3 4 5.
So you'll notice that yes the top will is immutable.
We did not change the elements that are referenced in these two positions right.
This one two and one two three are still the same object reference.
They're still the same memory address.
Same thing with the second element.
We cannot add elements to t we cannot remove an element from it and we cannot replace an element with
a new object a new memory address reference but we can certainly change the state of the object that's
referenced in both positions of T.
So yes T is immutable but the elements that Teac contained were not immutable.
So in fact t changed from our perspective.
You know the values that t contained changed but t's immutable.
Well this is why we got to be careful about what immutability really means.
Right.
The trouble is immutable that it can contained mutable elements so do not confuse mutability with something
that's completely frozen that can never change that it's you know it's not absolutely fixed.
It can sometimes change in the first example that we had when we contained three integers.
Yes that was completely you know frozen.
It could never change because not only was the topple immutable but it contained only immutable integers.
OK so we just have to be careful here.
So let's look at this teakwood 1 2 3 the top of these immutable.
So these are references to immutable objects right of type integer.
So this will never change.
However in the second case that we looked at top will cause the list 1 2 3 4.
The table is still immutable that hasn't changed but those are references to mutable objects.
And so we can change them right.
So a very subtle point but one to be careful with.
So let's take a look at some code let's jump into some code and see all this in action and just make
sure we understand it.
Let's start with a list.
So let's say we have my list equals 1 2 3.
So this is a memory address.
My list is an object.
It's a list object so we can actually do a type of my list.
They will tell us it's a list.
We can also look at the memory address of my list which is that now we can append an element to my list.
We could do something like this.
Append 4.
So now if we print my list out we have 1 2 3 4 but we'll notice that the ID the memory address of my
list has not changed.
This memory address here is the same that it was back there.
Right so it hasn't changed now let me show you a different way of putting elements into the list.
Let's say we have my list one is equal to one comma two commas three.
All right so it's that it has an address.
My last one.
So this address here which you'll notice is not the same as my list even though they contain the same
values.
They're not the same objects.
Now I could do this I could say my list underscore one is equal to my list underscore one plus.
And I'm going to add that element which is another list with one element for k.
Now we can look at what it is it's now one two three four.
But you notice we didn't depend here what we do is we concatenated two objects.
So what Python does it first evaluates the right hand side.
So it's first evaluated my list one plus list 4.
And then it combined those two lists and returned a new object.
And in fact we look at my list one will notice that it's memory address is not the same as it used to
be that was changed.
This was not modifying the internal state of my list.
One write the append method was modifying the internal state.
So we'll get to those methods when we look at lists in detail but for now just be aware of that.
Now this is not just you know the mutable objects is not just lists.
We can say my dict equals let's say we do a new dictionary.
Now you can create new dictionaries in a few ways you can use the object constructor this way or you
can use a literal are using these curly braces.
I'm going to use dict.
I like the keyword approach so I'd say key one equals one key two equals a.
So now I would print out my dict will see that contains these two key value pairs.
Now we can look at the ID of my dick
K..
So it's got this memory address.
Now if you want to add another key in there we can go and say key 3 equals let's make it a floating
point number.
OK.
So now my dict is that it's got these three keys and the ID of my dict has not changed right.
It is the same memory address OK.
So now I want to take a look at the example that I showed you with top of.
So let's start with a couple.
One two three.
OK.
Now the ID of the top hole is something it's again an object in memory and every element of that collection.
One two three in this case are integers and therefore they're all also objects and they happen to be
immutable objects.
So for example I can look at the first element of the Tofel gives us one.
I can look at the ID of the first element of the table and this is where one is stored in memory.
OK we can look at the ID of T and the second element in the top hole and we get a different memory address
and so forth.
So now let's go ahead and create a table that contains lists.
So I'll just use literals.
So let's say that the first element is 1 2.
And the second element is 3 4.
OK.
So now we can look at the idea of t.
It has this memory address.
Now we cannot add elements to the top.
We can't remove elements but we can certainly access the elements of the top right.
The first element is one.
The second element is 3 4.
So we could take the first element and append.
Let's say 3 or so.
Now if we look at the total T you'll notice that the first element has changed even though the top of
itself is immutable.
The collection sorry is immutable.
The element was mutable.
So we can modify the element itself.
That's OK but not the topple.
OK.
So that's really what I wanted to point out.
It's a subtle distinction but it's important to understand that just because you're dealing with an
immutable object doesn't mean that the contents can't change.
Especially when it comes to collections.
All right.
So thanks for watching.
I'll see you in the next video.